---
title: "[C++] 2.4 Const Qualifiers"
date: '2018-11-13 14:00:00'
layout: post
tag:
- C++
- data type
category: blog
author: Anran Zhou
---

## Const Qualifiers
Sometimes we want to define a variable whose value we know cannot be changed. We can use the keyword `const` to make a variable unchangable. 

* Because its value cannot be changed, we must initialize it.
```C++
const int i = get_size(); // ok: initialized at run time 
const int j = 42; // ok: initialized at compile time 
const int k; // error: k is uninitialized const
```

* By default, `const` Objects are local to a file. If we want to define a const object, there are two ways:
	* define a const object in a file and declare it in multiple files.
		```C++
		// file_1.cc defines and initializes a const that is accessible to other files extern 
		const int bufSize = fcn();
		// file_1.h
		extern const int bufSize; // same bufSize as defined in file_1.cc
		```
	* define the const object many times in different files.
	

### 1. References and Const
const Reference is a Reference to const.
* A Reference to const May Refer to an Object That Is Not const
	```C++
	int i = 42; 
	int &r1 = i;
	const int &r2 = i; 
	r1 = 0;
	r2 = 0;
	// r1 boundto i
	// r2 also bound to i; but cannot be used to change i
	// r1 is not const;i is now 0
	// error: r2 is a reference to const
	```

### 2. Pointers and Const
* A Pointer to const May Refer to an Object That Is Not const
* Two types:
	* A Pointer to const
	* Const Pointers


### 3. Top-level Const
* Concept
	* top-level const indicates that an object itself is const
	* Low-level const appears in the base type of compound types such as pointers or references.

* rules
	* const in reference types is always low-level
	* Pointer types, unlike most other types, can have both top-level and low-level const independently
		```C++
			const int *const p3 = p2; 
			// right-most const is top-level, left-most is not
		```

* Top-level Const VS. Low-level Const. When we copy an object: 
	* Top-level const is ignored. 
	* Low-level const is never ignored.
		* have the same low-level const qualification
		* a conversion between the types of the two objects.(non-const to const)
		
### 4. constexpr and Constant Expressions
A constant expression is an expression whose value cannot change and that can be evaluated at compile time. 
 * A `literal` is a constant expression. 
 * A `const object` that is initialized from a `constant expression` is also a constant expression.

#### 4.1 constexpr Variables
In a large system, it can be difficult to determine (for certain) that an initializer is a constant expression. So we introduce the keyword `constexpr`. Variables declared as `constexpr` are implicitly `const` and must be initialized by constant expressions.


#### 4.2 Literal Types


#### 4.3 Pointers and constexpr
`constexpr` imposes a top-level const.
```C++
const int *p = nullptr; // p is a pointer to a const int constexpr 
int *q = nullptr; // q is a const pointer to int
```