---
title: "[C++] 2.3 Compound types"
date: '2018-11-13 00:20:00'
layout: post
tag:
- C++
- data type
category: blog
author: Anran Zhou
---

## Compound Types
Compound type is a type defined by another type.

### 1. Compound Types in C++
Here we talk about two major Compound Types in C++:
 * references
 * pointers

### 2. declaration and declarator
A declaration is a `base type` followed by a list of `declarators`.
* Each declarator names a variable
* Each declarator gives the variable a type that is related to the base type.

Type modifier is a part of declarators. It changes the base type and apply it on the defined object.
For example, `int &p`. int is the base type; & is the type modifier and p is the defined variables.

### 3. References
A reference defines an alternative name for an object.
* must be initialized
* cannot rebind
* cannot refer literal
* reference type should match object type
	
#### 3.1 lvalue/rvalue reference
* when we use the term reference, we mean “lvalue reference.”
* Rvalue references are primarily intended for use inside classes.


### 4. Pointers
A pointer is a compound type that “points to” another type.

#### 4.1 Pointers VS. reference

Commons:
 * indirect access to other objects.

Uncommons:
 * no need for initialization. (But recommend because Uninitialized pointers are a common source of run-time errors.)
 * an object can be assigned, copied and rebinded.


#### 4.2 null pointer
A null pointer does not point to any object. 
* **check whether a pointer is null before attempting to use it. **
* initialize a null pointer using `nullptr`. (Older programs sometimes use a preprocessor variable named NULL, which the cstdlib header defines as 0.)
	* preprocessor happen before compile
* illegal to assign an int variable to a pointer

#### 4.3 `void*` Pointers
A special pointer can hold the address of any object.
 * It cann't do arithmetic operations.